# TOMST_data_handling
Collection of scripts to adquire and handle data generated by TOMST soil humidity and temperature sensors
(Wild et al., 2019)

The R script "1 SOILGUARD_TOMST_data_acquisition.R" has the instructions to adquire, process and integrate 
in a single file the raw TOMST data files contained in the "a procesar" folder. The files must be in the 
.csv native format (is highly recomended that the decimals are considered as points instead of commas*).

The script uses the "SOILGUARD-WP3_TOMST_ID.xlsx" file with the soil physical parameters required and the 
sensor serial number to file identifications and the "equations.csv" file with the parameters used in the 
R code. All this is based on the equations and calibrations used in the TMS Calibr "TMS3calibr1-11.xlsm" 
utility (excel macro file) at: https://tomst.com/web/en/systems/tms/software/ 

The structure of the "SOILGUARD-WP3_TOMST_ID.xlsx" Excel file per sheet goes as follows:

    - meta: Contains the names and formats to fill the others sheets, 
          please just take a look of it first and then use it as a guide to fill the remaining sections
    - sensor_ID: It would have the relation TOMST-code with the treatments (drought, heatwave, control), 
          soil and location information, please fill it as long as you can.
    - heatwave: Provide the heatwave period for your country and feel free to add any 
          relevant comment to consider.
    - irrigation: Put the dates of the irrigations you did.
    - cuts: If due to any situation in the field you need to exclude some sensor data 
          within a specific time margin, please indicate it in this sheet. 

More information about TOMST TMS-4 sensors could be find at:
https://tomst.com/web/en/systems/tms/tms-4/

Reference:
 Wild J., Kopecký M., Macek M., Šanda M., Jankovec J., & Haase T. (2019) Climate at ecologically relevant 
 scales: A new temperature and soil moisture logger for long-term microclimate measurement. Agricultural 
 and Forest Meteorology, 268, 40–47.

* If there are files using comma as decimal notation instead of points you can use the "comma2dot.R" script
   designed to standarize all the files to points.
